Engineering, Technology & Applied Science Research

Perspectives

Vol. 10, No. 2, 2020, 5576-5580 5576

Perspectives of Heat Stroke Shield: An loT based
Solution for the Detection and Preliminary Treatment
of Heat Stroke

Sadia Javed

Department of Computer Science and
Software Engineering
Jinnah University for Women
Karachi, Pakistan
sadi0921@gmail.com

Abstract—Heat stroke is considered a major problem in Karachi,
with a considerable number of people recorded as victims each
year. The proposed Internet-of-Things (oT) based heat stroke
shield works under heat stroke conditions, depending on a heat
index value (atmospheric temperature and humidity). The system
comprises of a wristband, a hardware kit and an alert system
which can pre-notify a wearer regarding his body parameter
readings. Moreover, the system can also work as a problem
solver, in heat stroke condition, by showering water on the
victim. In both cases, an alert will also be generated to the
wearer’s caretakers with his GPS location.

Keywords-Internet-of- Things; stroke;
wearable

gsm module; heat

I. INTRODUCTION

Global warming consists of a constant and continuous rise
in the temperature of earth’s atmosphere [1]. Among its many
catastrophic impacts, this rise in temperature has been an
evident cause of heat waves [2]. Continuous temperatures
above 32°C for three days is an obvious condition of heat wave
[3]. It is a prevalent natural climatic hazard with perceptible
impacts on the humans and biophysical systems and is
considered to be a global and constantly growing problem.
Heat wave cycle repeats on a yearly basis normally in summer
season with symptoms such as heat stress, heat exhaustion and
heat stroke. People who work in the sun continuously suffer
from sun stroke because of the excessive heat accumulated in
their body due to the continuous exposure. Also, elders,
specifically those with circulatory diseases are most vulnerable
to heat stroke [4]. Children are also considered to be a high risk
group to face heat exhaustion and heat stroke related problems.
Pakistan has been a victim of heat waves [5]. The heat waves
are common in pre-monsoon months (April-June) in the plains
of the country. In June 2015, the southern part of Pakistan was
affected by a severe heat wave in which temperature raised
above 45°C. Reported mortalities were due to suffocation,

 

Corresponding author: Sadia Javed

www.etasr.com

Samia Ghazala

Department of Computer Science and
Software Engineering
Jinnah University for Women
Karachi, Pakistan
samia_ghazala@yahoo.com

Ummay Faseeha

Department of Computer Science and
Software Engineering
Jinnah University for Women
Karachi, Pakistan
uf_uit@yahoo.com

dehydration and heat strokes [6]. The death toll for this year
rose noticeably to about 1200 individuals, resulting in a state-
of-emergency being declared at all public hospitals and
morgues. From 2015 onwards, people face extreme weather
conditions each year and a noticeable number of individuals get
affected. Densely populated cities are more vulnerable to
negative impacts of heat waves in Pakistan [7, 8]. Karachi is
one of the most heat stroke affected cities of Pakistan. The sea
breeze moderates the city’s climate as it is located on the coast
of the Arabian Sea. Due to the sea breeze a low-pressure
system generates in the ocean which may lead to a spike in
temperature. It causes the body temperature to increase and
affects the nervous system rapidly [9] resulting in death or
permanent organ damage or disability if not properly treated on
time. Furthermore, global climate change makes summers even
hotter. This weather fluctuation impact gets worse due to the
insufficient functioning of the weather forecast system [10].

To deal with the heat stroke problem, an IoT based
prototype is discussed in this paper which is using sensors to
measure certain parameters like body temperature, oxygen
level, and heat index (atmospheric temperature and humidity).
Wearing the proposed wristband, heat stroke can be detected in
advance, on the basis of these parameters, in children, elderly,
and adults. A hardware kit, specifically for bedridden or on a
wheel chair patients, is also integrated with the wristband for
sprinkling water vapors on the heat stroke victim.

II. RELATED WORK

New technological advancements in the field of
communications, specifically in mobile network and sensor
technology, are further improving the channels and removing
the existing obstacles [11]. A new technological era of Internet
of Things (IoT) is emerging rapidly and many vendors are
constructing sensor enabled devices which follow the open
standards allowing these devices to be integrated with any type
of system, i.e. inventory management systems, customer

Javed et al.: Perspectives of Heat Stroke Shield: An IoT based Solution for the Detection and ...
Engineering, Technology & Applied Science Research

support systems, business intelligence, and health care
applications [12]. Data acquisition, analysis and processing
have become more convenient and transparent with the support
of IoT. Health services are also actively taking part by
providing information on time [13]. In IoT based healthcare
systems, a patient/victim can not only be monitored remotely
but an automated cure can be provided as first aid in case of an
emergency. A model which is efficiently dealing with real time
data for the health care system by taking advantage of IoT is
proposed in [14]. Similarly, a number of wearable
physiological monitoring systems has been developed focusing
mainly on the heat illness of astronauts, athletes, firefighters,
and soldiers. These systems comprise of an array of sensors
that can be assimilated with clothes/wearables to continuously
sense the physical parameters of the wearer and keep track of
his/her health status effectively [15]. Similar systems have been
proposed for treating heat exhaustion or heat stroke. In [16],
heat stress monitoring is done by a flexible Bluetooth based
self-adhesive patch which is attached on the chest of the
patient. It analyzes heat illness by monitoring certain body
parameters. A heat illness monitoring system for firefighters is
proposed in [17], which uses a wearable shirt integrated with
sensors to analyze temperature, humidity, and heart rate. The
low energy wireless protocol Zigbee is used for sending the
information to the remote device. Another Zigbee based
wearable device is proposed in [18] which is worn on the wrist

Vol. 10, No. 2, 2020, 5576-5580 5577

and the finger of a person (athlete or infant). It is used to check
heart rate and temperature of the wearer and an alert message is
sent to the caretakers if the parameters reach a certain
threshold. Temperature and heart rate sensors fabricated on
gloves are used to detect heat stroke conditions. A smart watch
uses body temperature for the prediction of heat stroke in [19]
with water intake also monitored by the system. A GPRS and
WiFi based system is discussed in [20] which is mainly
focusing on the detection of the presence of humans, especially
children, inside locked cars. Heat stroke is monitored by
temperature sensor and an alert is generated to the owner of the
car in case of emergency. Likewise, a Bluetooth/GPRS based
system is proposed to address heat stroke in [21], in which an
accelerometer sensor is used to detect user movement. The
movement detection beyond a certain defined threshold will
result in alarm generation. Nontechnical solutions to control
body temperature in case of heat exertion are discussed in [22].
Body temperature can be dropped by 0.35°C /min if the patient
is immersed in cold water at 2°C while the temperature
decreasing rate in an air-conditioned rooms is only around
0.05°C. Alternatively, applying ice packs or crushed ice can
also be used to lower body temperature up to a certain limit
[23, 24]. These methods can work efficiently with excertional
heat strokes. In the case of non-exertional heat strokes, air blow
with water spray can bring gradual change in the body
temperature up to 0.31°C/min [25].

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

TABLE I. COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT HEAT STRESS MONITORING SYSTEMS
Heat stress monitoring system Communication Hardware Body parameters analyzed | Target audience
Flexible self-adhesive patch type system for Bluetooth Self-adhesive patch ECG, body temperature, Heat stress victim
professional heat stress monitoring [16 humidity, 2-axis acceleration | of any age group
Wearable system for heat stress monitoring in . . Temperature, humidity, .
firefighting applications [17] Zigbee Wearable shirt heart rate, Firefighters
A Zigbee-based wearable physiological Zigbee Wristband, finger clip Heart rate, temperature Athlete or infant
parameters monitoring system [18]
Children, elderly
Heat stroke detection system based in IoT [15] TCP/IP Hang Glove Heart rate, temperature people, adults of
productive age
HeatWatch [19] Bluetooth Smart watch, smartphone Body eee water All age groups
Affordable system for alerting, monitoring and GPRS/WiFi Smart vehicle Temperature sensor, Children
controlling heat stroke inside vehicles [20] presence detection, location
Minimizing heatstr oke incidents for young Bluetooth/ GPRS | Estimate Beacon device Movement detection Children
children left inside vehicles [21]

 

 

 

 

 

II]. PROPOSED SYSTEM DESIGN

A. Controling Element

The Arduino Nano comprises of an ATmega328P
microcontroller bearing the same features as Arduino Uno with
compact size and 8 analog ports (A0-A7) and 11 general
purpose digital ports (D2-D12). The small size and advanced
features of Arduino prove it to be an appropriate choice for
wearable devices [26-31]. Arduino IDE platform is used to
program the controller as per the desired features of the
proposed system. It processes the information received from
the sensors and sends the information through the wireless
medium to the android application used by the caretaker and
the designed kit simultaneously, in case of emergency for
treatment from the adverse effects of heat waves. The proposed
system works on an IoT concept to provide connectivity

www.etasr.com

between the wearable device and the mobile application
without human intervention.

B. Sensors for Parameters’ Intuiting

A heat stroke can be harmful if the patient is not treated
urgently due to the rise in body temperature (greater than
40.0°C). Therefore, in this proposed system, real time data of
the following parameters will be sensed by respective sensors:

e Body temperature
e Blood oxygen level

e Heat index (comprised of environmental temperature and
humidity)

A body temperature sensor is connected with the analog
input pin, a heat index sensor with a digital input pin and a

Javed et al.: Perspectives of Heat Stroke Shield: An IoT based Solution for the Detection and ...

 
Engineering, Technology & Applied Science Research

blood oxygen sensor with another analog input pin of the
Arduino to analyze and compare received data with the saved
information. All the sensors are embedded in the wearable
device.

1) Human Body Temperature Sensor

Humans are effected by heat stroke majorly due to the
change in body temperature with respect to change in
environmental temperature and humidity level. Environmental
temperature and humidity level are collectively called heat
index [32]. Therefore, the proposed system is focused on
human body temperature in comparison with external weather
conditions. MLX90614 sensor is a non-contact infrared
thermometer connected at a digital input of the Arduino embed
in the wrist band and measures the infrared radiation emitted
from the human body. The purpose of the controller is to
absorb infrared radiation from the body and convert it to heat.
The heat is converted into electrical energy, which is
communicated to a detector to determine the temperature of the
body. The normal range of human body temperature is between
37-38°C, when heat index reading is between 27-32°C.
Therefore, the effected person or the caretaker must be cautious
and have to take some measures to drop body temperature.
However, if the temperature of the human body raises from 39-
40°C at heat indexbetween 32-41°C, then the person needs
extreme attention because these symptoms of heatstroke can be
lethal and the patient’s body temperature must drop quickly. In
the proposed solution, MLX90614 sensor is used for the
continuous monitoring of the human body temperature along
with the other parameters such as heat index and oxygen level.

 

 

TABLE II. HEAT STOKE AND ENVIRONMENTAL PARAMETER
EFFECTS
mee) temperature (°c) Oe) Observation
27-32 37-38 75-73 Caution
32-41 39-40 72-70 Extreme caution
41-54 41-42 69-65 Danger
Over 54 Above 42 Less than 65 Extreme danger

 

 

 

 

 

2) Heat Index

Heat index is used to measure apparent temperature or feel-
like temperature. Therefore, the proposed system focuses on
environmental temperature and humidity along with other
parameters. An SHT75 sensor is used to sense environment
temperature and humidity levels. It consists of a capacitive
element which measures relative humidity and a band gap
sensor which measures temperature. The sensor is connected
with an analog pin of the controller and gives the results in
digital form. Ther output of SHT75 will be compared with the
output of the MLX90614 sensor and SpO2 sensor to get the
actual impact of heat wave on human body.

3) Light-based SpO2 sensor

In the proposed idea, SpO2 is used to sense the oxygen
level of the human body, it is a clamp-like device which is
connected to the input of the Arduino in a wrist band.
Minorrays of light pass through the blood in the wrist,

www.etasr.com

Vol. 10, No. 2, 2020, 5576-5580 5578

measuring the amount of oxygen through the changes of light
absorption in oxygenated or deoxygenated blood.

C. Communication Technology

Long range wireless connectivity is required for the
uninterupted flow of sensed data in the case of an emergency.
Therefore, a GSM/GPRS module is used for sending alert
messages to the registered number of the caretaker. The GSM
module is heplful to mentain long range _ wireless
communication between the caretake and the wearer. It is the
most suitable device for IoT applications because of its size and
features of text messaging, phone calling, and accessing the
internet through GPRS. However, GPRS services will not be
used to avoid the additional penetration of harmful rays in
human body.

IV. IMPLEMENTATION

The methodology of the proposed system is shown in
Figure | in which environmental parameters (heat index) along
with human body temperature and oxygen level are the main
areas of concern in case of extreme weather conditions.
Therefore, the decision of sending alert or activation of the
showering kit will be depending upon the parameters discussed
in Table I. The proposed system will be composed of two
modules. The first module is based on a wearable wristband
which is used while the user is in mobility as shown in Figure
2. Figure 3 shows the second module comprised of a wristband
along with a showering kit for immobilized persons.

 

 

 

Heat Index (HI)

      
 

 

 

 

 

Body Temp (BT) andOxygen
level (OX)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The wristband in both modules is designed with embedded
sensors. MLX90614, SpO2 and SHT75 sensors are used to
monitor heat index, body temperature, and oxygen level
respectively. The working of the wristband will start with the
sensing of the value of heat index (HI). If the HI value is
greater than 32°C, it is considered an indication of extreme
caution for heat stroke. To examine accurately, the processing
unit will immediately check body temperature and oxygen
level. If the body temperature increases to 39°C or above and
the oxygen level decrease below 70mm Hg, then it is

Javed et al.: Perspectives of Heat Stroke Shield: An IoT based Solution for the Detection and ...
Engineering, Technology & Applied Science Research

considered a certain condition of heat stroke and the GSM
module placed on the wristband will send an alert message to
the caretaker. If the wearer also wants to keep track of his
fluctuating condition, he can also get alert on his mobile device
and can take precautionary measures himself. This is
considered to be an obvious advantage of this setup.

A

Body temperature /
sensor MLX90614 Bx ~ ar
e| \ Al
‘
8 n
Oxygen Level %¢@
sensor SPO2 y Caretaker receives alert in

case of emergency ic. Heat
Parameters like — body Index(3241°C) and Body
temperature, oxygen level Temperature (39-40 °C) or

Ambient and ambient temperature Oxygen level (72-70 mm
temperature . and humidity will be Hg)
sensor SHT75 measured using wearable

device

Fig. 2. Proposed system module 1: wearable wrist band

wk

 

Sensors like MLX90614,

SPO2 and SHT75 is embed
in a wrist band along with

; :
3 1 i
Caretaker receives alert in

case of emergency Heat
Index(32-41°C) and Body

Temperature (39-40 °C) or
Oxygen level (72-70) mm
Hg)

showering kit which will be
automatically activated in
case of emergency

Fig. 3. Proposed system module 2: wristband along with showering kit

The same setup followed by a water showering kit will be
used as a second module. This device will be designed
especially for patients. In addition to generate an alert from
wristband to the caretaker, a Bluetooth enabled showering kit
will also start working on the same values of monitored
parameters. Kit will shower water vapors on the heat stroke
victim progressively until the caretaker handles the condition of
the patient. This will act like first aids for the patient when no
one is nearby to take care of him in a case of an emergency.
The second module is covering both features of the system, i.e.
monitoring and treating.

V. TEST CASE

A solution is proposed for addressing heat stroke by
measuring body temperature and oxygen level of an elder adult.
Figure 4 shows the prototype of the system. A site in Karachi
has been selected for experiment in the extreme weather of
June, 2019. The observed heat index and body temperature
were 43.2°C and 39.2°C respectively. The system successfully

www.etasr.com

Vol. 10, No. 2, 2020, 5576-5580 5579

generated an alert message to caretaker’s contact number fed
already in the application.

VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

The proposed system is an attempt to address cataclysmic
situations of heat stroke. The wristband contains sensors for
continous measurement of crucial parameters like body
temperature, oxygen level, and heat index, and it can also send
alert messages to the caretakers in a case of an emergency. This
is beneficial for all age groups and for persons engaged in
different outdoor activities. The integrating hardware kit with
wristband, especifically working for debridden patients and
elderly people, is used to provide first aid as well. Architecture
and simple design corroborate to make it an afforable and
easily implementable system. In the future, more parameters
like pulse rate and sweating can be monitored considering other
illnesses or diseases.

 

 

Fig. 4. The prototype of the proposed system

REFERENCES

[1] T. P. Hughes, J. T. Kerry, S. K. Wilson, “Global warming and recurrent
mass bleaching of corals”, Nature, Vol. 543, pp. 373-377, 2017

[2] M.S. Nashwan, S. Shahid, “Spatial distribution of unidirectional trends
in climate and weather extremes in Nile river basin”, Theoretical and
Applied Climatology, Vol. 137, pp. 1181-1199, 2019

[3] M. Akbar Baig, S. Waheed, A. Mian, E. Hussain, “Unforgiving heat
wave deaths in the largest metropolitan city of Pakistan: Lessons
learned”, Eurasian Journal of Emergency Medicine, Vol. 14, pp. 209-
210, 2015

[4] S. Rauf, K. Bakhsh, A. Abbas, S. Hassan, A. Ali, H. Kachele, “How
hard they hit? Perception, adaptation and public health implications of
heat waves in urban and peri-urban Pakistan”, Environmental Science
and Pollution Research, Vol. 24, pp. 10630-10639, 2017

[5] N. Khan, S. Shahid, T. Ismail, K. Ahmed, N. Nawaz, “Trends in heat
wave related indices in Pakistan”, Stochastic Environmental Research
and Risk Assessment, Vol. 33, pp. 287-302, 2019

Javed et al.: Perspectives of Heat Stroke Shield: An IoT based Solution for the Detection and ...
[6]

[7]

[8]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

Engineering, Technology & Applied Science Research

S. G. Saleem, T. Ansari, A. S. Ali, S. Fatima, M. H. Rizvi, M. A. Samad,
“Risk factors for heat related deaths during the June 2015 heat wave in
Karachi, Pakistan”, Journal of Ayub Medical College Abbottabad, Vol.
29, No. 2, pp. 320-324, 2017

A. Mhatre, V. Thengre, H. Sharma, S. Sharma, “Design of smart cooling
jacket for 2-wheeler riders”, International Journal of Recent Trends in
Engineering and Research, Vol. 4, No. 3, pp. 211-216, 2018

S. Ullah, Q. You, A. Ali, W. Ullah, M. A. Jan, Y. Zhang, W. Xie, X.
Xie, “Observed changes in maximum and minimum temperatures over
China-Pakistan economic corridor during 1980-2016”, Atmospheric
Research, Vol. 216, pp. 37-51, 2019

S. Percic, A. Kukec, T. Cegnar, A. Hojs, “Number of heat wave deaths
by diagnosis, sex, age groups, and area, in Slovenia, 2015 vs. 2003”,
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, Vol.
15, No. 1, Article ID 173, 2018

K. Ahmed, S. Shahid, N. Nawaz, N. Khan, “Modeling climate change
impacts on precipitation in arid regions of Pakistan: A non-local model
output statistics downscaling approach”, Theoretical and Applied
Climatology, Vol. 137, pp. 1347-1364, 2019

T. Lang, “Advancing global health research through digital technology
and sharing data”, Science, Vol. 331, pp. 714-717, 2011

I. Lee, K. Lee, “The Internet of Things (oT): Applications, investments,
and challenges for enterprises”, Business Horizons, Vol. 58, No. 4, pp.
431-440, 2015

A. Geissbuhler, “Access to health information: a key for better health in
the knowledge society”, Yearbook of Medical Information, Vol. 17, No.
1, pp. 20-21, 2008

J. Luo, K. Tang, Y. Chen, J. Luo, “Remote monitoring information
system and its applications based on the Internet of Things”,
International Conference on Future BioMedical Information
Engineering, Sanya, China, December 13-14, 2009

M. Haghi, K. Thurow, R. Stoll, “Wearable devices in medical Internet of
Things: Scientific research and commercially available devices”,
Healthcare Informatics Research, Vol. 23, No. 1, pp. 4-15, 2017

D. G. Park, S. C. Shin, S. W. Kang, Y. T. Kim, “Development of
flexible self adhesive patch for professional heat stress monitoring
service”, IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology 27th Annual
Conference, Shanghai, China, January 17-18, 2005

G. Florea, R. Dobrescu, D. Popescu, M. Dobrescu, “Wearable system for
heat stress monitoring in firefighting applications”, Recent Advances in
Computer Science and Networking, pp. 129-134, 2013

K. Malhi, S. C. Mukhopadhyay, J. Schnepper, M. Haefke, H. Ewald, “A
Zigbee-based wearable physiological parameters monitoring system’,
IEEE Sensors Journal, Vol. 12, No. 3, pp. 423-430, 2012

T. Hamatani, A. Uchiyama, T. Higashino, “HeatWatch: Preventing
heatstroke using a smart watch”, IEEE International Conference on
Pervasive Computing and Communications Workshops (PerCom
Workshops), Kona, USA, March 13-17, 2017

S. Garethiya, H. Agrawal, S. Gite, Suresh, V. A. Kudale, G. Wable, G.
R. Yendargaye, “Affordable system for alerting, monitoring and
controlling heat stroke inside vehicles”, International Conference on
Industrial Instrumentation and Control, Pune, India, May 28-30, 2015

H. Mahdin, A. H. Omar, S. S. Yaacob, S. Kasim, M. F. M. Fudzee,
“Minimizing heatstroke incidents for young children left inside vehicle”,
IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering, Vol. 160,
Article ID 012094, 2016

F. G. Gaudio, C. K. Grissom, “Cooling methods in heat stroke”, The
Journal of Emergency Medicine, Vol. 50, No. 4, pp. 607-616, 2016

A. Bouchama, M. Dehbi, E. C. Carballo, “Cooling and hemodynamic
management in heatstroke: Practical recommendations”, Critical Care,
Vol. 11, Article ID R54, 2007

J. E. Smith, “Cooling methods used in the treatment of exertional heat
illness”, British Journal of Sports Medicine, Vol. 39, No. 8, pp. 503-507,
2005

A. J. Kielblock, J. P. V. Rensburg, R. M. Franz, “Body cooling as a
method for reducing hyperthermia. An evaluation of techniques”, South
African Medical Journal, Vol. 69, No. 6, pp. 378-380, 1986

K. Krishnamurthi, S. Thapa, L. Kothari, A. Prakash, “Arduino based
weather monitoring system”, International Journal of Engineering
Research and General Science, Vol. 3, No. 2, pp. 452-458, 2015

A. D. Deshmukh, U. B. Shinde, “A low cost environment monitoring
system using Raspberry Pi and Arduino with Zigbee”, International

www.etasr.com

Vol. 10, No. 2, 2020, 5576-5580

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

5580

Conference on Inventive Computation Technologies, Coimbatore, India,
August 26-27, 2016

S. Lee, J. Jo, Y. Kim, H. Stephen, “A framework for environmental
monitoring with Arduino-based sensors using restful web service”, IEEE
International Conference on Services Computing, Anchorage, USA,
June 27-July 2, 2014

S. Ferdoush, X. Li, “Wireless sensor network system design using
Raspberry Pi and Arduino for environmental monitoring applications”,
Procedia Computer Science, Vol. 34, pp. 103-110, 2014

V. Tiwari, A. Keskar, N. C. Shivaprakash, “Design of an IoT enabled
local network based home monitoring system with a priority scheme”,
Engineering, Technology & Applied Science Research, Vol. 7, No. 2,
pp. 1464-1472, 2016

S. Zafar, G. Miraj, R. Baloch, D. Murtaza, K. Arshad, “An IoT based
real-time environmental monitoring system using Arduino and cloud
service”, Engineering, Technology & Applied Science Research, Vol. 8,
No. 4, pp. 3238-3242, 2018

P. O. Antonio, C. M. Rocio, R. Vicente, B. Carolina, B. Boris, “Heat
stroke detection system based in IoT’, IEEE Second Ecuador Technical
Chapters Meeting, Salinas, Ecuador, October 16-20, 2018

Javed et al.: Perspectives of Heat Stroke Shield: An IoT based Solution for the Detection and ...
