Mouse and human urothelial cancer organoids: A tool
for bladder cancer research

Jasper Mullendersa,b,1, Evelien de Jongha,b, Anneta Brousalic,d, Mieke Roosena,b, Jan P. A. Bloma,b, Harry Begthela,b,
Jeroen Korvinga,b, Trudy Jongese, Onno Kranenburgc,d, Richard Meijerf, and Hans C. Cleversa,b,2
aHubrecht Institute, Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences and University Medical Center Utrecht, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands; bOncode
Institute, Hubrecht Institute, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands; cUMC Utrecht Cancer Center, Utrecht University, 3584 CX Utrecht, The Netherlands; dUtrecht
Platform for Organoid Technology, Utrecht University, 3584 CX Utrecht, The Netherlands; eDepartment of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht,
3584 CX Utrecht, The Netherlands; and fDepartment of Oncologic Urology, University Medical Center Utrecht, 3584 CX Utrecht, The Netherlands
Contributed by Hans C. Clevers, December 19, 2018 (sent for review March 8, 2018; reviewed by Rene H. Medema and Ellen Zwarthoff)

Bladder cancer is a common malignancy that has a relatively poor
outcome. Lack of culture models for the bladder epithelium
(urothelium) hampers the development of new therapeutics.
Here we present a long-term culture system of the normal mouse
urothelium and an efficient culture system of human bladder
cancer cells. These so-called bladder (cancer) organoids consist of
3D structures of epithelial cells that recapitulate many aspects of
the urothelium. Mouse bladder organoids can be cultured
efficiently and genetically manipulated with ease, which was
exemplified by creating genetic knockouts in the tumor suppressors
Trp53 and Stag2. Human bladder cancer organoids can be
derived efficiently from both resected tumors and biopsies and
cultured and passaged for prolonged periods. We used this
feature of human bladder organoids to create a living biobank
consisting of bladder cancer organoids derived from 53 patients.
Resulting organoids were characterized histologically and functionally.
Organoid lines contained both basal and luminal
bladder cancer subtypes based on immunohistochemistry and
gene expression analysis. Common bladder cancer mutations like
TP53 and FGFR3 were found in organoids in the biobank. Finally,
we performed limited drug testing on organoids in the bladder
cancer biobank.

bladder cancer | organoid | urothelium

Bladder cancer is the sixth most common malignancy in men,
and treatment for advanced cases has not improved in the
last 30 y (1, 2). In recent years, the introduction of neoadjuvant
chemotherapy (NAC) has resulted in an increase of 6% in the
10-y overall survival (3). In addition, new therapies including
antibodies and immune checkpoint inhibitors have further improved
the treatment and survival of bladder cancer patients (4).
The success of immune checkpoint inhibitors can most likely be
partially attributed to the high mutational load present in many
bladder tumors (5). One reason for the lack of improvement in
treatment is the absence of model systems to study the normal
and malignant bladder epithelium (urothelium). The urothelium
consists of several cell layers lining the bladder wall,
providing an impenetrable barrier for urine (6). Under physiological
conditions, renewal of the urothelium is relatively slow
compared with other tissues (7). Mutations in oncogenes and
tumor suppressors can lead to the formation of bladder cancer.
Bladder cancer is classified in two pathological categories: non−
muscle-invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC) and muscle invasive
bladder cancer (MIBC) (8). Patients with NMIBC have a relatively
good prognosis, and can be treated by surgical removal of
the tumor and subsequential intravesical chemotherapy (Mitomycin
C) or immunotherapy (bacillus Calmette–Guérin) (8). In
addition, NAC has been introduced and shown to be beneficial
for a subset of MIBC patients (3). Currently, no good procedure
exists to identify patients who will respond well or poorly to
NAC. Finally, for patients with MIBC, the predominant treatment
option is radical cystectomy, a procedure in which the entire bladder is removed (8). Furthermore, genetic and gene
expression studies have shown that bladder cancer is a very
heterogeneous disease with the presence of a large number of
mutations (9, 10).
Currently, few model systems exist that faithfully recapitulate
the biology of the normal urothelium and bladder cancer. Cultures
of primary mouse and human bladder cells have been
reported but are limited, due to their short lifespan (11, 12).
Improving on this is the development of urothelial cells from
induced pluripotent stem cells (13, 14). Models for the study of
bladder cancer include bladder cancer cell lines. These, however,
fail to recapitulate many aspects of the original tumor and are
often difficult to establish (15, 16). Genetic mouse models and
orthotopic xenografts for bladder cancer have been created and
studied as well (17–20). These models are a faithful representation
of the clinical manifestation, but are time-consuming to
establish and maintain. Three-dimensional cultures of primary
bladder cancer cells have recently been published (21, 22). This
inspired us to apply our previously published organoid culture
method of colorectal, pancreas, and prostate cancer cells on
bladder cancer (23–25). Similar studies were published recently
showing the feasibility of this approach (26–28). Unlike the
previously published 3D culture methods, organoids can be
passaged multiple times and thereby be massively expanded. To
enable the growth of bladder (cancer) cells, we amended the
original organoid protocol that was tailored for colorectal cancer
(29). Molecular signals that regulate renewal of the urothelium 
under physiological conditions are incompletely understood.
Upon bacterial infection, rapid proliferation of the urothelium is
observed (30). For this reason, we screened several culture media
conditions, in which we included growth factors and inhibitors
that were previously published to influence urothelium
culture (31–34). In contrast to most published media compositions
for the culture of either normal mouse urothelium or human
bladder cancer, our bladder (cancer) organoid media is
completely defined and devoid of any animal products. Here we
present the development of a culture system for the mouse
urothelium. In addition, we present the construction of a living
biobank with organoids derived from more than 50 bladder
cancer patients.
Significance
Bladder cancer poses a big clinical challenge, particularly in
advanced cases. Here we present a culture system for bladder
cancer based on organoid culture technology. We have created
a living biobank containing organoids grown from over 50 patient
samples, which reflects many aspects of bladder cancer
pathogenesis. Organoids of human bladder cancer cells can be
maintained for prolonged periods of time, and closely resemble
the tumor histology. Bladder organoids can be used for
drug screening, and therefore provide a platform for development
of new drugs for the treatment of bladder cancer and
personalized medicine.
Results
Establishment of Primary Murine Bladder Basal Cell Organoids. To
establish murine bladder organoids, we mechanically dissociated
mouse bladder tissue and extracted cells with collagenase. The
resulting cell suspension was plated in basement membrane extract
and supplied with culture media containing growth factors
(Fig. 1A). First, we screened different culture media to find the
optimal growth conditions for mouse bladder organoids (data
not shown). Components of this culture media were based on
previous reports on primary bladder urothelium and published
organoid culture, for instance, mouse prostate (33–35). Organoids
appeared in several different media conditions after only a
few days in culture (SI Appendix, Fig. S1). Surprisingly, epidermal
growth factor was unable to sustain long-term cultures of
mouse bladder organoids (SI Appendix, Fig. S1). This procedure
is very efficient and allowed us to generate organoid lines in all
instances that we attempted. Culture media is described in detail
in the experimental procedures and is of remarkable low complexity
compared with previously published organoid media.
Murine bladder organoids are dense structures of cells that
proliferate fast and have a grape-like morphology (Fig. 1B).
When seeded at low density, murine bladder organoids grow very
large in size and branch extensively (SI Appendix, Fig. S2A).
Although these branches seem to form a tube-like structure,
imaging showed that these structures are, in fact, solid (SI Appendix,
Fig. S2B). Murine bladder organoids could be passaged
on a weekly basis and propagated for prolonged periods (>2 y).
During this prolonged passaging (60 passages in total), no gross
chromosomal abnormalities were observed, as determined by
karyotyping (SI Appendix, Fig. S2C).
Next, we performed immunohistochemistry (IHC) to determine
the cellular composition of murine bladder organoids.
Using antibodies for basal (keratin 5, Ck5), intermediate (p63),
and suprabasal/umbrella (keratin 20, Ck20, and UpkIII) cell
markers, we observed that most cells in the organoids resemble
basal cells (Fig. 1C) (36). Remarkably, we did not observe any
cells that were positive for either keratin 20 (Ck20) or uroplakin
(UpkIII) proteins. These observations were corroborated by
changes in gene expression measured by qPCR (SI Appendix,
Fig. S2 D and E). To get a more in-depth view of the composition
of our mouse bladder organoids, we performed confocal
microscopy on whole-mount organoids. These experiments
confirmed the presence of Ck5+ cells in the organoids (Fig.
1D). Keratin 5 is a marker of basal cells in the urothelium;
therefore, we will refer to these organoids as basal bladder
organoids. The presence of stem cells is a hallmark of
organoids (37). Unfortunately, no urothelial stem cell markers
are known, although it has been reported that urothelial stem
cells reside in the basal cell layer (36). In addition, we observed
that most cells in mouse bladder organoids are positive
for CD44, a previously proposed marker for stem cells in
bladder cancer (Fig. 1E) (38).
Establishment of Murine Ureter and Suprabasal Bladder Organoids.
Organoids derived from entire dissociated bladders lacked
suprabasal and umbrella cells. To derive organoids containing all
cell types of the urothelium, we used two alternative methods to
isolate cells from the urothelium. First, we established organoid
lines from ureter tissue. Mouse ureter was prepared into a cell
suspension by collagenase digestion and plated into basement
membrane extract, and cultured using the same media we optimized
for bladder organoids. Murine ureter organoids did show
a markedly different morphology compared with basal bladder
organoids (Fig. 2A). Next, we extracted cells from mouse bladder
by filling the bladder ex vivo with trypsin. In this way, we hoped
to enrich the extracted cells for suprabasal umbrella cells that
were lacking from our basal organoid cultures. Organoids derived
from this procedure morphologically were very similar to
ureter organoids (Fig. 2A). Both ureter and suprabasal mouse
urothelial organoids could be established efficiently and passaged
frequently (every 2 wk). Strikingly, when we analyzed these
organoids using IHC, we observed uroplakin positive cells, indicating
the presence of intermediate or umbrella cells (Fig. 2B).
Furthermore, keratin 5-positive cells were also present, showing
that these organoids contain both basal and suprabasal cells (Fig.
2B). Similar to basal organoids, we observed the presence of the
basal marker (Ck5) predominantly on the outside of organoids 
(SI Appendix, Fig. S3A), while CD44 appeared to have a broader
pattern of staining (SI Appendix, Fig. S3B). To get a better understanding
of the transcriptional patterns in both our basal
bladder and ureter organoids, we performed RNA sequencing.
Approximately 1,200 genes were found to be significantly (P <
0.05) differentially expressed when comparing organoids and primary
urothelium (SI Appendix, Fig. S3C). Apparent from this
analysis was a very high level of expression of several basal
markers (Keratins 4, 5, 6a, and 14) in basal bladder organoids (SI
Appendix, Fig. S3D). Similarly, we observed an absence of luminal
cell markers (Krt20 and uroplakins) in our basal organoids (SI
Appendix, Fig. S3D).
Genetic Editing of Murine Basal Bladder Organoids. Few long-term
cultures of primary mouse or human urothelium have been
reported (39). Bladder organoids provide a system in which
genetic editing experiments can be performed. As a proof of
concept, we used CRISPR/Cas9 technology to create knockout
basal urothelium organoids. Basal cells (Ck5+) have been reported
to be the cell of origin of MIBC and carcinoma in situ (40). We
chose to genetically target one very well-established tumor suppressor
(Trp53) and one recently identified tumor suppressor in
urothelial carcinomas (Stag2) (41–43). Stag2 is a member of the
cohesin complex that is involved in sister chromatid cohesion,
DNA looping, and DNA damage repair (44). We transfected
murine basal bladder organoids with Cas9 and gRNAs (guide
RNAs) targeting the Trp53 and Stag2 genes. The Stag2 gene is
located on chromosome X, which creates the opportunity to
generate knockouts in male cells with CRISPR/Cas9 with relative
ease. We performed CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing for the
Tp53 and Stag2 genes in organoids derived from male and
female animals. Plasmids containing Cas9 and gRNAs for
Tp53 and Stag2 were transfected into bladder organoids made
into single-cell suspensions. Next, we selected for cells that had
inactivated their Tp53 gene by adding an MDM2 inhibitor
(Nutlin) to the culture media (Fig. 2C). Organoids derived
from both male and female animals were treated with
TP53 gRNAs and proliferated in the presence of Nutlin (data
not shown). Single organoids were picked and expanded, and
the targeted genomic locus was sequenced; results shown here
are from bladder organoids derived from female animals. As
expected, in all clones tested, both alleles of the p53 gene were
found to be mutated (Fig. 2E). We found that, in some clones
(2 out of 10), in addition to a mutation in Tp53, both alleles of
the Stag2 gene had incurred a mutation (Fig. 2E). We confirmed
that this, indeed, resulted in a complete loss of endogenous
Stag2 protein by Western blot analysis (Fig. 2F). In
addition, we confirmed that the Smc1a protein, another
member of the cohesin complex, is unaffected by the loss of
Stag2 (Fig. 2F). Strikingly, we did not observe an obvious
phenotype in our p53/Stag2 double-knockout organoids. The
experiments above show that the genome of murine bladder
organoids can be edited with ease and high efficiency.
Establishment of an Organoid Biobank of Human Urothelial
Carcinoma. Bladder cancer, predominantly urothelial carcinoma,
is a relatively common cancer (8). Currently, very few model
systems exist to study this disease. Therefore, we decided to
create an in vitro organoid-based culture system of urothelial
carcinoma. Patients diagnosed with MIBC are generally treated
through radical cystectomy, a procedure in which the entire
bladder is removed. This provides a source of tissue that we
could access after obtaining informed consent from the patient.
We collected samples from the bladder tumor as well as macroscopically
normal urothelium from the same patient (indicated
with N and T, respectively, in the organoid identifier). For urothelial
carcinoma, it has been reported that normal-appearing
epithelial cells can harbor genetic lesions similar to the tumor
(45). These tissue pieces were prepared into a cell suspension
and grown as organoids (Fig. 3A). Culture media was optimized,
resulting in a growth factor mix that was very similar to the
mouse bladder culture media (for details, see Experimental Procedures
and SI Appendix, Fig. S4). We observed that several fibroblast
growth factors (FGFs) stimulated the proliferation of
human bladder cancer organoids; to understand which FGFs are
essential for human bladder cancer organoids, we tested these
individually (SI Appendix, Fig. S5). From this experiment, we
learned that both FGF7 and FGF10 are sufficient for the growth
of human bladder cancer organoids. Human urothelial organoids
cultures could be established with around 50% efficiency and
propagated for extended periods (>1 y). Most bladder cancer
patients are diagnosed through biopsies taken using a cystoscope
entering the bladder through the urethra. Pathological assessment
of tissue obtained through these so-called transurethral
resections (TUR) confirmed the presence of the disease and
distinguishes MIBC from NMIBC. In addition, we used biopsies
from TUR procedures to establish organoid cultures (Fig. 3B).
After optimizing culture conditions, we set out to create a biobank
of human bladder cancer organoids. This biobank was
intended to capture the diversity of bladder cancer on the cellular
and molecular level as previously reported (9, 10, 46). We
prospectively collected samples from 53 bladder cancer patients
(42 cystectomies and 11 TURs) and processed these into organoid
cultures (Fig. 3C). A list of all organoid lines used in this study as
well as patient information can be found in SI Appendix, Table S1.
Similar to previous reports, we observed a gender bias in the
samples that we collected (Fig. 3C). We initiated 133 organoid
cultures from the 53 patient samples we collected. In most cystectomy
cases, we started cultures from both normal and tumor
tissue, and, in the case of large tumors, we established several lines
of different parts of the tumor. So far, we have managed to culture
several organoid lines for more than 30 passages (Fig. 3D and SI
Appendix, Table S1).
Histological Analysis of Bladder Cancer Organoids. The vast majority
of bladder cancers are classified as urothelial carcinoma (8).
Within urothelial carcinoma, several different histologies are
observed (47). During the culturing of the bladder cancer organoids,
we observed morphological differences between samples
derived from different patients (Fig. 4A). Organoids from different
patients appeared as either solid (Fig. 4A, iv) or lumen-containing
(Fig. 4A, iii ). Some organoids appeared as smooth rounded
(Fig. 4A, v) or elongated (Fig. 4A, ii ) structures, while other
organoids (Fig. 4A, i ) had a very irregular morphology. For
more in-depth analysis of our bladder organoid biobank, we
performed IHC on a selection of our organoids (Fig. 4B).
Haemotoxylin and Eosin (H&E) staining confirmed that some
organoid lines grow as solid structures (HBL11T1 and HBL13T),
while others contain a lumen inside the organoid structure
(HBL8N and HBL11T2). In addition, H&E staining showed
several different cellular morphologies. As expected, all organoids
contained active cycling cells as measured by Ki67 staining
(Fig. 4B). We assessed the presence of basal (Ck5+) cells, which
were present in most organoid lines (but absent in HBL6-I and
HBL11T1) (Fig. 4B). Furthermore, we used TP63 to stain basal
and intermediate cells, which were present in all organoids tested
so far (Fig. 4B). Strikingly, we observed a big difference in the
presence of CK20+ (luminal) cells in the organoids we tested so
far. Some organoids (most prominent in HBL13T) were clearly
positive Ck20, while most others were negative. Two commonly
described subtypes of bladder cancer are the luminal and basal
subtypes (46, 48). The luminal subtype is characterized by Ck20+
cells, while the basal subtype contains Ck5+ cells (46). Based on
these criteria, sample HBL13T would be classified as luminal
bladder cancer, while most others (HBL8N, HBL10N, and
HBL11T2) resemble more the basal subtype. Worth noting is the
difference between two organoid lines that were derived from
the tumor in patient HBL11 (HBL11T1 and HBL11T2): Only
one of the two contains Ck20+ cells. This highlights the fact that
the culture of tumor samples as organoids is a great asset in the
study of tumor heterogeneity.
Human Bladder Cancer Organoids Contain Basal and Luminal Cells. To
confirm the presence of basal and luminal cells in human bladder
cancer organoids, we performed immunofluorescent imaging.
We stained organoids with different antibodies that are known to
stain basal (Ck5), luminal (Ck20), and potential tumor-initiating
cells (CD44) (Fig. 5) (38). We confirmed IHC results and
showed that luminal and basal markers do not cooccur within
cells. Indeed, we observed that heterogeneity exists between
different samples; for instance, sample HBL8N contains no
Ck20+ luminal cells, while HBL13T has an abundance of Ck20+
cells (Fig. 5A). We confirmed that, as expected, Ck5+ cells are
never Ck20+, and vice versa (see merge image of HBL13T). In
addition, we observed that both organoid lines tested here (including
HBL8N, which originated from healthy urothelium)
contained an abundance of CD44+ cells, a previously found
marker for tumor-initiating cells in urothelial carcinoma (Fig.
5B) (49).
Functional Validation of Bladder Cancer Organoids. To confirm that
the organoids resulted from the bladder tumors, we performed a
series of functional tests. Bladder cancer is characterized by the
presence of large numbers of mutations (9, 10). Several key tumor
suppressors and oncogenes are among the genes that are
found mutated in bladder cancer (9, 10). One of the most
common tumor suppressors that is inactivated in bladder cancer
is TP53 (9, 10). To identify organoid lines that harbored a mutation
in TP53, we added the MDM2 inhibitor Nutlin-3 to the
culture media (Fig. 6A) (50). Addition of Nutlin-3 will induce
cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in cells with a functional
p53 pathway but leave cells with a mutant p53 pathway unaffected.
We observed that several human bladder cancer organoids
showed unimpeded growth in the presence of Nutlin-3,
leading to the conclusion that these organoid lines have inactivated
which human bladder organoids have an activated growth factor
receptor pathway (Fig. 6B). Activation of growth factor receptor
pathways in bladder cancer has been described to occur at
the receptor level (activating FGFR3 mutations) as well as
downstream activators (51). To screen for growth factor independence,
we cultured organoids in the absence of any growth
factors in the culture media. We observed that some organoid
lines managed to keep proliferating in the absence of growth
factors (Fig. 6B). Results from the Nutlin and FGF withdrawal
experiments are summarized in SI Appendix, Fig. S6 and Table
S1. Next, we performed targeted sequencing of the most frequent
site of mutation in FGFR3 and confirmed that this mutation
was indeed present in the growth factor-independent
organoid line (Fig. 6C). Genomic instability is a common feature
of bladder cancer (52). To assess gross genomic abnormalities in
the bladder cancer organoids, we performed karyotyping. The
majority of organoid lines tested (10 out of 11 lines) showed an
abnormal number of chromosomes, leading to the conclusion
that these lines are of cancerous origin (Fig. 6D). In recent years,
RNA expression studies have identified several molecular subtypes
of bladder cancer (53). Different studies have uncovered as
many as seven subtypes or as few as two subtypes (46, 53, 54).
Two commonly found subtypes of bladder cancer are the basal
and luminal subtypes, which are characterized by gene expression
patterns that reflect normal basal and luminal cells in the
urothelium (46). We used qPCR to assess the expression levels
of both basal (KRT5 and KRT6) and luminal (KRT20, UPK1A,
and UPK3A) markers in human bladder cancer organoids to see
whether bladder cancer organoids can be classified in basal and
luminal subtypes (Fig. 6E). This analysis identified several basal
(HBL30, HBL11T2, and HBL11T3) and luminal (HBL13T and
HBL29) subtypes in our organoid collection (Fig. 6E). Other
organoids lines (HBL7T1, HBL7T2, HBL9N, HBL9T, HBL28,
and HBL31) do not clearly identify with one of the subtypes
above. More in-depth analysis is required to find how these
molecular subtypes are maintained in organoid lines.
Human Bladder Organoids as Predictors of Therapy Response. We
randomly selected three organoid lines from our human bladder
cancer biobank and exposed these to several commonly used
chemotherapeutic agents. These drugs were chosen because they
are used as first-line treatment for bladder cancer. Organoids
were subjected to a range of concentrations of drugs and incubated
for 5 d. We observed differences when comparing the
different lines in their response to the drug treatment (Fig. 7). For
example, organoid line HBL7T2 was relatively resistant to epirubicin
and doxorubicin, two widely used topoisomerase inhibitors.
In contrast, organoid line HBL12N was more sensitive to
gemcitabine and vincristine. These experiments show how human
bladder cancer organoids can be employed to determine response
to anticancer drugs. Potential applications include the screening of
novel drugs and predicting the response of tumors to current
treatment options.
Discussion
Preclinical bladder cancer research has mostly been performed
on a small set of bladder cancer cell lines (15). These cell lines
poorly recapitulate many features seen in human bladder tutumors.
In addition, mouse models for bladder cancer (PDX and
genetic models) have been generated (20). Here, we have developed
a culture method for human bladder cancer cells and
mouse primary urothelial cells. This culture method is based on
the previously established organoid cultures for human and
mouse normal and tumor cells (23, 55). Recently, the generation
of mouse bladder organoids was reported by several research
groups (26, 27, 56). In contrast to previously published culture
methods of normal mouse urothelium, organoid cultures of
normal mouse urothelium could be passaged for prolonged periods
of time. In addition, mouse urothelial organoids can be
genetically manipulated with relative ease, as shown here for the
Trp53 and Stag2 genes. These experiments show that mouse
bladder organoids provide an effective tool to model and study
oncogenic mutations.
Compared with traditional cell line generation, human bladder
cancer organoids can be generated at high efficiency (60 to
70%). Due to this high efficiency, we have been able to generate
several independent organoid lines from individual tumors,
which creates the potential to study intratumor heterogeneity in
great detail. In addition, we grew organoids from macroscopically
healthy urothelium from patients whose bladders were removed
in cystectomy procedures. Upon analysis, we found that
several tissues that were pathologically scored healthy were in
fact premalignant (based on p53 status and karyotype). This
confirms earlier findings that describe the field effect in bladder
cancer: Premalignant cells spread through the epithelium and,
upon acquiring more mutations, give rise to the formation of
bladder cancer (49).
Organoids are classified as stem cell-containing selforganizing
structures that can be propagated for prolonged
periods of time (37). The exact identity of the urothelial stem
cell is currently a matter of debate (30, 57, 58). We found that
all mouse and most of our human bladder (cancer) organoids
contained cells that stained positive for keratin 5 and CD44,
two putative (cancer) stem cell markers (30, 38). Further
analysis of our organoids can potentially shed light on the
actual stem cell in the urothelium.
Bladder cancer is a very heterogeneous disease on the molecular
and genetic level (9). Histological and immunofluorescence
(IF) analysis of our human bladder cancer organoids
showed a large variation between organoids from different tumors.
In addition, we confirmed that human bladder organoids
can also be classified based on their gene expression signature,
similar to what has been shown for tumor samples (59). The
fact that bladder organoids can be grown for prolonged periods
allowed us to perform functional studies. For instance, we show
that cells with a very common FGFR3 mutation (S249C) can
proliferate for prolonged periods in the absence of any growth
factor in the media. This also opens the possibility to screen
(novel) drugs on bladder cancer organoids, potentially yielding
much-needed new therapeutics for the treatment of this disease.
On exiting area is the application of immunotherapy for
the treatment of bladder cancer. Several groups have reported
the coculture of immune cells with organoids; these models
could be very useful for bladder cancer to identify patients who
will respond well to immunotherapy regimen.
Experimental Procedures
Human Tissue. Human bladder tissue was obtained from the University Medical
Center Utrecht (UMCU). Ethical approval was granted by the Medical Ethical
Committee of the UMCU. Written informed consent was obtained from all
patients involved. Bladder tissue was obtained through TUR or cystectomy
procedures. All tissue samples were examined by a dedicated uropathologist.
Mouse Bladder Organoid Culture. To collect cells for murine basal bladder and
ureter organoids, after surgical excision of the murine bladder or ureter,
the tissue was cut into small pieces (1 mm to 2 mm) with a surgical blade.
Next, the tissue was placed into a collagenase solution (1 mg/mL of collagenase
from Clostridium histolyticum, C9891; Sigma Aldrich) in Adv DMEM/F-12
(ThermoFisher 12634028) with ROCK inhibitor (Y-27632, 10 μM). The tissue was
incubated at 37 °C for 2 × 30 min while shaking. Resulting cell suspension was
filtered through a 70-μm filter, and cells were collected through centrifugation.
To collect cells for murine suprabasal organoids, murine bladders
were surgically removed. Bladders were filled with between 0.5 mL and
–1 mL of TrypLE (ThermoFisher 12605036) containing ROCK inhibitor (Y-
27632, 10 μM) using a hypodermic needle. The bladder opening was
closed using a suture to prevent leakage. Filled bladders were placed in a
Petri dish with Adv DMEM/F-12 and placed in a humidified incubator at 37 °C
for 30 min. After incubation, cell suspension was filtered through a 70-μm
filter, and cells were collected through centrifugation. Next (similar for
basal, ureter, and suprabasal organoids), cells were plated in ∼200 μL of
Basement Membrane Extract (BME, Cultrex 3533-001-02) in four individual
wells of a prewarmed 24-well plate. After the BME was solidified, mouse
bladder media [Adv DMEM/F-12, FGF10 (100 ng/mL of Peprotech 100-26),
FGF7 (25 ng/mL of Peprotech 100-19), A83-01 (500 nM), and B27 (2% ThermoFisher
17504001)] was added. Mouse ureter, basal, and suprabasal bladder
organoids were passaged weekly and either sheared through a glass
pipet or by dissociation using TrypLE. ROCK inhibitor (Y-27632, 10 μM) was
added to the media after passaging, to prevent cell death. Organoids were
frozen in freezing media (50% FBS, 10% DMSO, and 40% Adv DMEM/F-12)
and could be recovered efficiently.
Human Bladder Organoids. Human bladder tissue was examined by a trained
pathologist. In the cystectomy cases, whenever possible, we obtained a
piece of tumor tissue and a piece of normal- appearing tissue fromthe same
patient. The tissue was cut into smaller pieces (1 mm to –2 mm) with a
surgical blade and digested with collagenase (1 mg/mL of collagenase
from Clostridium histolyticum, C9891; Sigma Aldrich) in Adv DMEM/F-12
(ThermoFisher 12634028) with ROCK inhibitor (Y-27632, 10 μM) for 30 min′
at 37 °C. The incubation was repeated once, after which the cell suspension
was filtered through a 70-μm strainer. Cells were collected by centrifugation
and resuspended in ∼200 μL of BME (Cultrex 3533-001-02) and
plated into four individual wells of a prewarmed 24-well plate. When the
BME was solidified, human bladder organoid media was added [Adv
DMEM/F-12, FGF10 (100 ng/mL of Peprotech 100-26), FGF7 (25 ng/mL of
Peprotech 100-19), FGF2 (12.5 ng/mL of Peprotech 100-18B), B27 (2%
ThermoFisher 17504001), A83-01 (5 μM), N-acetylcysteine (1.25 mM), and
nicotinamide (10 mM)]. Human bladder organoids were passaged biweekly
and either sheared through a glass pipet or by dissociation using
TrypLE (ThermoFisher 12605036). ROCK inhibitor (Y-27632, 10 μM) was
added to the media after passaging, to prevent cell death. Organoids were
frozen in freezing media (50% FBS, 10% DMSO, and 40% Adv DMEM/F-12)
and could be recovered efficiently.
Histology. Organoids and tissue were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 1 h to
6 h, dehydrated, and paraffin-embedded according to standard histology
procedures. Sections were stained with H&E and the following antibodies:
Keratin 5 (AF138 COVANCE 160P-100), Ki67 (Monosan MONX10283), Keratin
20 (KS20.8 Dako M7019), TP63 (4A4 Abcam ab735), and Uroplakin III (AU1
Progen 651108) according to the manufacturer’s protocols. Images were
acquired with a Leica DM4000 microscope.
Immunofluorescence. Organoids were fixed in 4% formaldehyde solution for
6 h and overnight (o/n). Next, fixed organoids were blocked with 2% donkey
serum in PBS. Blocked organoids were permeabilized with 0.5% Triton in
PBS. Primary antibody was incubated in 0.1% Triton in PBS at 4 °C o/n. Antibodies
used in this study are Keratin 5 (AF138 COVANCE 160P-100), Keratin
20 (KS20.8 Dako M7019), and CD44 (IM7 Biolegend 103015). After incubation
with the primary antibody, organoids were washed, F-actin was
stained with Phalloidin (Sigma 65906), and DNA was stained with DAPI.
Transfection. Mouse bladder organoids were transfected with Lipofectamine
2000 (ThermoFisher 11668027). Mouse bladder organoids were dissociated to
single cells with TrypLE (brand) and passed through a 70-μmcell strainer. Cells
were resuspended in regular culture media, added to the Lipofectamine/
DNA mixture, and plated in a suspension cell culture plate. Cells were
centrifuged at 600 × g for 60 min at 32 °C and subsequently placed back into
the tissue culture incubator for 4 h to 6 h. Next, cells were plated in BME in
regular culture media.
CRISPR Genome Editing. CRISPR experiments in mouse bladder organoids
were performed using two different methods. For TP53, we used a separate
gRNA and Cas9 plasmid as described previously (60). To target mouse Stag2,
we used the pSpCas9(BB)-2A-Puro or pSpCas9(BB)-2A-GFP plasmid (61). Here
we cotransfected plasmids encoding the TP53 gRNA together with pSpCas9(BB)-
2A-Puro with a Stag2 gRNA. The gRNA sequences used in this study are
mouse TP53: AAGTCACAGCACATGACGG and mouse Stag2: ACTGATTTTAATCTACTGCA.
Nutlin-3 (5 μM) was added 72 h after transfection, and
organoids were maintained in Nutlin-containing culture media until viable
clonal organoids were observed. Single organoids were picked and expanded.
Genomic DNA was isolated and amplified to confirm the presence
of mutations at the gRNA target site. PCR primers used were TP53 (F:
TGGTGCTTGGACAATGTGTT, R: TACCTTATGAGCCACCCGAG) and Stag2 (F:
CTCAGGTTACTGTGTCTTGAGAA, R: TGCCACTTCTGTAATATTTTGGATC). PCR
products were sequenced using one of the primers used for amplification to
identify mutations introduced.
Western Blot. Organoids were recovered from BME and incubated in TrypLE
for 5 min to remove remaining BME. Organoids were resuspended in
radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer and sonicated to ensure efficient
lysis. Protein lysates were loaded on SDS/PAGE and transferred to immobilon
membrane. Proteins were visualized using the following antibodies: Stag2:
J-12 Santacruz, SMC1A: Bethyl A300-055A, and GAPDH: Abcam ab9485.
Karyotyping. Organoids were split 2 d to 5 d before the start of karyotype
procedure. Cells were treated with colcemid (final concentration: 100 ng/mL;
ThermoFisher 15210040) in the culture media for 16 h. Cells were collected
and made into single-cell suspension by TrypLE addition. Single cells were
swollen by addition of 75 mM KCl and incubation at 37 °C for 10 min. Cells
were fixed by addition of MeOH/HAc (3:1) while vortexing the cell suspension.
Fixed cells were dropped on a microscopy slide and stained with DAPI.
Metaphases were imaged with a 100× objective.
The qRT-PCR. RNA was isolated using an RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen 74104).
The cDNA was prepared using GoScript reverse transcriptase (Promega
A5003) using random hexamers (ref). The qRT-PCR was run using Biorad
SYBR green supermix (1708886). Primers used were mHprt: F-CAGTACAGCCCCAAAATGGT,
R-CAAGGGCATATCCAACAACA; mKrt5: F-GTCAGGACTGAGGAGAGGGA,
R-TGTCCAGGACCTTGTTCTGC; mTrp63: F-CCTCCAACACAGATTACCCG,
R-AGCTTCTTCAGTTCGGTGGA; mKrt20: F-CGAGCACCATCCGAGACTAT,
R-TGCAGCCAGCTTAGCATTGT; mUpk1B: F-GAAGAAGGCAGAGGAGACCA,
R-AATCAACAGGCCCTGGAAG; mUpk2: F-GTATGGCATCCACACTGCCT, RGAGACAGCAGACCAGAGAGG;
mUpk3a: F-AGCGGCTCTTACGAGGTTTA, RAGTAGTGCTCAGTGGGACGC;
hKRT5: F-GGAGCTCATGAACACCAAGC,
R-CTGGTCCAACTCCTTCTCCA; hKRT6A: F-CTGAGATCGACCACGTCAAG, RCAGCTTGTTCTTGGCATCCT;
hKRT20: F-TTGAAGAGCTGCGAAGTCAG, RGAAGTCCTCAGCAGCCAGTT;
CD44: F-GACAAGTTTTGGTGGCACG,
R-CACGTGGAATACACCTGCAA; hFOXA1: F-CTGTGAAGATGGAAGGGCAT,
R-GCCTGAGTTCATGTTGCTGA; hUPK1A: F-ATCACGGTGGGTGTAGGACG,
R-TGCCATCTTCTGCGGCTTCT; and hUPK3A: F-CAATATGTCCACGGGCTTG,
R-CGTGTCGATCGTCGAGTATG.
RNA Sequencing. Urothelium was isolated by scraping the surface of an
opened murine bladder with a surgical blade. RNA of organoids and urothelium
was isolated using an RNeasy kit. RNA sequencing of mouse urothelium
and organoids was performed using the CEL-Seq2 protocol (62).
Paired-end reads from Illumina sequencing were aligned to the human
transcriptome with BWA (63). Differential expressed genes were identified
using the Bioconductor package DESeq (28).
Drug Response. Organoids were split using TrypLE and strained through a 70-
μm filter and replated in BME. Two days later, organoids were counted, and
1,000 organoids per well were plated in a 384-well plate in culture media
containing 5% BME. Drugs were added at the indicated concentration, and
cells were incubated for 5 d. Cell viability was measured using CellTiter-Glo
3D (Promega G9681).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Marie Bannier for critical reading of the
manuscript; members of the Clevers group for useful discussion; and Willem
de Blok (Master in Advanced Nursing Practice) for patient counseling. This
work is part of the Oncode Institute, which is partly financed by the Dutch
Cancer Society and was funded by Dutch Cancer Society Grant KWFBUIT2012-
5358.
Fig. 1. Establishment of murine urothelial organoid cultures. (A) Schematic
of organoid culture procedure of murine bladder. (B) Representative
bright-field images showing the morphology of murine bladder organoids.
(Scale bars, 100 μm.) (C) IHC analysis of murine bladder (Top) and murine
urothelial organoids (Bottom) for H&E, Ck5, Ck20, and UPKIII as indicated.
(Scale bars, 100 μm.) (D) IF staining of murine bladder organoids with Ck5,
Phalloidin (F-actin), and DAPI (DNA) as indicated. (Scale bars, 100 μm.) (E)
IF staining of murine bladder organoids with CD44, Phalloidin (F-actin),
and DAPI (DNA) as indicated. (Scale bars, 100 μm.)
Fig. 2. Establishment of murine ureter and suprabasal bladder organoids.
(A) Schematic of organoid culture procedure of murine ureter and suprabasal
bladder organoids. (B) IHC analysis of murine ureter (Top) and murine
suprabasal bladder organoids (Bottom) for H&E, Ki67, Ck5, Ck20, and UPKIII
as indicated. (Scale bars, 100 μm.) (C) Schematic of CRISPR experiment in
murine basal bladder organoids. (D) Images of transfected (p53 and
Stag2 gRNAs) and control bladder organoids in absence and presence of
5 μM Nutlin in the culture media. (E) Sanger sequencing of the mouse Trp53
(Top) and Stag2 (Bottom) genomic loci. In both cases, a Sanger sequencing
trace of a wild-type (wt) organoid is compared with a knockout (ko) organoid.
(F) Western blot analysis of resulting organoid wt and p53/Stag2 ko
clones for indicated antibodies. Asterisk (*) indicates a nonspecific background
band generated by the Stag2 antibody.
Fig. 3. Establishment of human urothelial cancer organoids. (A and B)
Schematic overview and representative images of organoids derived from
(A) human bladder tissue obtained from radical cystectomies and (B) biopsy
material obtained from TUR procedures. (Scale bars: tissue, 1 cm; organoids,
500 μm.) (C) Overview of the composition of the human bladder cancer
biobank indicating the proportion of samples obtained from each procedure
(TUR and cystectomy) and the gender distribution of the bladder samples.
(D) Overview of bladder cancer organoids lines; each bar represents a single
organoid line.
Fig. 4. Morphology and histology of human bladder cancer organoids. (A)
Representative images of human bladder organoid lines. (Scale bar, 500 μm.)
(B) IHC of normal human bladder tissue (HBL8N Tissue) and six representative
human bladder cancer organoid lines. Tissue and organoids were
stained for H&E, Ck5, Ki67, Ck20, and TP63 as indicated. (Scale bar, 50 μm.)
Fig. 5. Cellular composition of human bladder cancer organoids. (A) IF
staining of two representative human bladder cancer organoid lines with
Ck5, Ck20, Phalloidin (F-actin), and DAPI (DNA) as indicated. (Scale bars,
50 μm.) (B) IF staining of two representative human bladder cancer organoid
lines with Ck5, CD44, Phalloidin (F-actin), and DAPI (DNA) as indicated. (Scale
bars, 50 μm.)
Fig. 6. Functional analysis of the human bladder cancer organoid biobank.
(A) Images of human bladder cancer organoid cultures in the presence and
absence of Nutlin in the culture media. (B) Images of human bladder cancer
organoid cultures in presence and absence of FGF in the culture media. (C)
Sanger sequencing of the FGFR3 genomic locus in human bladder cancer
organoids. (D) Karyotype analysis of human bladder cancer organoids as
indicated. (E) RT-qPCR for basal (KRT5 and KRT6) and luminal markers
(KRT20, UPK1A and UPK3A) in human bladder cancer organoid. (Scale bars,
500 μm.)
Fig. 7. Drug response to chemotherapeutic agents. Organoids were subjected
to the chemotherapy drugs (A) epirubicin, (B) mitomycin C, (C)
gemcitabine, (D) vincristine, (E) doxorubicin, and (F) cisplatin. Cell viability
was measured and plotted as percentage of untreated organoids.